Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to answer the question, what is a promise?
So in our previous lesson, I said that we would learn about a more modern and elegant way of handling
this unknown timing situation of our log-in function.
Right.
We don't want to send back our response to the browser until our login function has had a chance to
complete and we don't know how long it's going to take to complete.
So we set up this traditional callback approach to handle this situation and it works perfectly.
And throughout the majority of JavaScript history, this is how you would handle a situation like this.
However, recently JavaScript added something called Promises to the Language, and promises were specifically
designed from the ground up for this exact unknown timing situation.
So in this lesson, our goal is to convert this traditional callback approach to instead use a promise.
Now, just a fair warning.
At first you might not see the big difference or benefit between a promise and the traditional callback
approach.
That's OK.
And to be expected, just know that towards the end of this lesson, we will walk through another example
that will make the benefit of promises crystal clear.
All right.
Without further ado, let's get started.
So right now, I want you to follow along with me and let's jump in to our uppercase user GFS model
file within our user model.
Let's scroll down until we find our login function.
So it's the line that begins with user prototype dot login.
Since we are no longer going to use the traditional callback approach, let's actually get rid of the
word callback here within these parentheses.
OK, and next, what I want us to do is empty out the body of this function.
Now, we don't actually want to delete all of this code.
Instead, I just want us to temporarily cut it into our clipboard.
So select from the beginning of this clean up down to this closing curly bracket in parentheses, and
then let's cut this into our clipboard.
So at this point, login simply equals an empty, anonymous function.
Now, within the body of this empty function, type this in with me.
We want to return a new promise.
Now, notice that promise here begins with an uppercase or capital letter.
This is because it's a blueprint or a constructor that we can use to create new promises.
So the JavaScript language itself has this blueprint that we can leverage.
So now when we call this log in function from within our user controller, this function is going to
return a new object.
That is a promise.
Now, when you create a promise like this within these parentheses, we want to pass it a function.
So inside our promise parentheses, let's include an anonymous function, function, parentheses, curly
brackets.
I realize I still have not explained what in the world the promise really is, but trust me, we're
almost there.
So within the parentheses for this function that we're passing into promise, we need to give it to
parameters.
Technically, you can name these whatever you want, but the industry standard or common convention
names are resolve and reject.
Now, these two words, let us begin to see what a promise is.
So now within the body of this function, we can perform asynchronous operations or operations that
are going to take some time to complete.
And then whenever those actions are complete, we just call resolve or reject.
That's how we let JavaScript know that this promise has either completed in the case of resolve or had
a chance to fail in the case of reject.
Let me show you what I mean.
So within the body of this function that we are passing into promise, I want you to paste in your clipboard.
OK, now remember our database action of finding one document in the user's collection that's going
to take some time, it might take five milliseconds or it could take five thousand milliseconds.
The idea is that when it does have a chance to complete, then we were calling our callback function.
Well, now that we're using a promise instead of a callback, check this out.
Within this success area, instead of calling callback, we can just change callback to resolve and
then within this else bracket in case things failed.
Right.
In case it was an invalid username or password.
Well, in that case, instead of calling callback, we can just call reject.
All right.
Now, we are very close from being able to use this promise from within our user controller file.
Before we do that, we need to take care of one last detail that has nothing to do with promises but
has everything to do with this keyword in JavaScript.
So when we create a promise, we give it a function as an argument.
But a traditional anonymous function like this is going to change this key word within it.
To get around this, we can use an arrow function instead of a traditional function like this, right.
Because an arrow function does not manipulate the this keyword.
So right within the parentheses for our promise, let's get rid of this word function.
And then right after the closing parentheses, after a reject, let's add in this equal sign greater
than symbols squished together the arrow.
And now we're good to go.
Now the this keyword will not change.
So these references to this outdated username and this outdated password will still make sense.
OK, now that we've set up our first promise, let's go ahead and save this file and now go try to actually
use or leverage this promise from within our controller.
So let's jump into user controller DOT just now within our login function here.
We still want to call user log in, but we no longer want to use this callback approach.
So let's hollow or empty out the parentheses for user login.
So I would just delete from the beginning of function here to this closing curly bracket.
OK, so if you need to pause the video to catch up so that your login function looks like this, that's
OK.
The idea is we are creating this lowercase user object from the uppercase user blueprint and then we
are calling its login method.
Now we know that this login method is going to return a promise.
So the big question is how do you use or leverage a promise once you've created one?
Well, check this out after user log in after the closing parentheses, we want to say dot, then parentheses
and then after that dot catch parentheses.
Now, using a promise is as simple as saying what you want to do.
If the promise was successful within the then parentheses and saying what you want to do within the
catch parentheses if the promise failed.
Let me show you what I mean.
So within both then and catch, we just provide a function.
So within the then parentheses, let's say function, parentheses, curly brackets.
And if our promise was successful, meaning our promise called resolve instead of reject.
Well, in that case we would just want to say response dot send.
Right.
We want to send a response back to the Web browser and then we can receive whatever value the promise
resolved with by including a parameter within these parentheses.
You could call it whatever you want, you could call it X or Unicorn or pizza, but let's just call
it result.
OK, and then that's what we would want to send back to the user.
So response that send result.
OK, but what if things go wrong or in other words, what if the promise calls reject instead of resolve.
Well, we just provide a function within each so function parentheses, curly brackets and then let's
just send back response to the browser.
So response dot send and we'd want to send the message that's getting passed in from reject.
Right.
It's going to say sorry, that password and username are invalid so we can receive that reject value
by adding a parameter within these parentheses.
You could name the parameter whatever you want, but it's an industry standard to usually call it either
E for error or error or error.
I'm just going to call it E and then that's what we would want.
Our response to be a response.
Dot send E.
OK, now let's go ahead and save this file and.
Test it out, so back in the browser, if I try to log in with bogus values.
I see invalid username, password, but if I go back and login with my actual correct values.
Awesome, we see congrats.
So things are working, but at this point, I realize that you might be thinking, what's the big deal
or why are promises so great?
Because you might look at this code and think that it looks just as messy or even messier than the traditional
callback approach we had before.
That is a completely normal reaction.
Don't worry, in a couple of minutes, we will walk through another example where we will see the benefits
of using promises.
But before we get to that, I want to jump back in to our user model file.
And I want to be consistent, meaning since we're using promises, let's go ahead and adjust our database
action to also use a promise instead of the traditional callback approach.
Right.
Because we are using our Mongo DB object here users collection and then we are calling the find one
method.
And after this first argument where we tell it what we want to find in the database, then we are providing
a second argument that is just a callback function.
Right.
This Mongo DB method is going to call our callback function at the appropriate time, meaning we are
still using the callback approach for this database action.
Now, luckily, the Mongo DB package is very modern and up to date, meaning, yes, we can use its
methods with a traditional callback approach.
But this function of find one will also return a promise.
I believe almost all of the Mongo DB methods actually return promises.
And this is great.
So check this out to convert this into using promises instead of a callback.
Let's just cut and paste this if else block into our clipboard.
So I'm going to begin selecting right before the word if and then select down to the closing curly bracket
for else.
So let's cut that into our clipboard, OK?
And then within the find one parentheses, let's get rid of the second argument, which is this function
here.
So I would begin selecting right before this comma, so include the comma and then select down until
this closing curly bracket, but stop right before this closing parentheses now.
Be sure to just hit the delete or backspace key on your keyboard because we do not want to overwrite
our clipboard.
All right, perfect.
So now we are calling the database.
Find one method and we are giving it just this one argument.
All right.
Now, because I know that the Mongo DB method is going to return a promise.
This means that at the end of this line.
So after the closing parentheses here, we can just say dot then parentheses, dot, catch parentheses.
OK, then let's just provide a function within each of these.
So within the then parentheses, let's provide an arrow function.
So pair of parentheses and then the arrow symbol and then curly brackets.
Let's drop down in between the curly brackets.
OK, and then this is where we can just paste in our clipboard.
OK, now we want to be able to access the document that the database might find and before we were accessing
it by saying attempted user.
Now, if the database finds a document, it's going to pass that when it calls resolve.
So we can receive that by including a parameter within our parentheses here.
You could name it anything, but let's name it attempted user just so it matches our previous code.
OK, so that takes care of the situation where the database operation completes successfully.
But what if there's some sort of database error or unexpected error?
Well, that's what the catch is for.
So within the catch parentheses, let's provide a function, function, parentheses, curly brackets
and let's just reject with a generic message of please try again later.
So this is just sort of a generic error message implying that there's something wrong with the server
or some unforeseen error that we didn't account for.
Right.
Meaning we're not sure why, but the Mongo DB method failed for one reason or another, meaning it has
nothing to do with the user typing in an incorrect username or password.
It's just an error on our side as a developer.
Let's go ahead and save this and take it for a test drive.
So back in the browser, if I tried to log in with bogus values, cool invalid username, password,
but if I go back and actually use my correct values, awesome.
We see.
Congrats.
OK, at this point, let's review things.
So far we've learned how to create our own promise and then leverage it.
And we learned how to leverage a pre-existing promise that the Mongo DB package provided or created.
But it's still not clear why promises are useful or preferable over traditional callbacks.
So right now, I want to jump in to a new example exercise that will make the advantages of promises
crystal clear.
So in the resources for this lesson, you'll find two links to code pen examples.
Right now, I want you to pause the video and open up the first code and link.
It should look something like this.
And at the top of the JavaScript column, we see this comment that says use the functions that are named,
eat breakfast, eat lunch, eat dinner and eat dessert to eat your meals in the traditional order.
And then we see this comment that says, do not modify below this line until instructed to do so.
And this is where I've created functions named eat breakfast, eat lunch, so on and so forth.
So the idea here is on line number two.
I want you to use those functions.
So right here, let's call eat breakfast parentheses to call it.
We see down in the preview area that adds you just ate breakfast.
OK, right below that, let's call eat lunch and then right below that, let's call eat dinner and then
right below that call, eat dessert.
Now, notice in the preview area down here that these are not in the order that we would expect, even
though we called them in the traditional order of breakfast, lunch, dinner, dessert.
We see you just eat dessert.
You just ate lunch.
You just eat dinner, you just eat breakfast.
This is because when I created or defined these functions, I included random amounts of delays before
they actually complete or add that text to the Web page.
So the breakfast function is going to wait eight hundred milliseconds before actually performing that
action.
Eat lunch is going to wait three hundred milliseconds.
Dinner is going to wait six hundred and desserts only going to wait forty milliseconds.
I did this to simulate the nature of asynchronous actions.
Right.
When we do something like talk to a database or send out a request to another server, we don't know
how long those actions are going to take.
Now, here's where things get interesting.
Even though this order is unpredictable, right.
Clearly, the functions did not complete in the same order that we called them, even though that's
the case, if you.
Right.
Click anywhere in this open area and choose, inspect.
And then if you click on to the console tab, you see that these messages are in the order that we would
want.
Right?
Breakfast, lunch, dinner, dessert.
So what's going on here?
Well, let's take the breakfast function as an example.
So in Code Penn, if we go to about line number nine, we see the function definition for eat breakfast
and we see that it begins by logging this message to the console.
The eat breakfast function just started executing.
However, it doesn't actually add its message to the webpage of you just ate breakfast until this eight
hundred millisecond delay completes.
Now, remember these costs.
Old out loud messages, those were executed in the order that we would expect breakfast, lunch, dinner,
dessert.
That's what we see in the console, however, and this is where the confusion comes into play.
You might think in a perfect world that the eat lunch function would not run until the eat breakfast
function has completed.
Now, I suppose that's true in a sense, but ultimately it's not the case.
What I mean by this is, yes, they eat breakfast function is going to begin running before JavaScript
moves on to call eat lunch.
That's why we see this line does appear first.
The breakfast function just started executing in the console.
However, then we have this asynchronous function or this function that's going to take time to complete.
And JavaScript is not going to freeze the world and sit around waiting for this to take its eight hundred
milliseconds before JavaScript moves on to the next operation.
So, yes, at a basic level, JavaScript is going to run these function calls in the order that we would
expect, but it's not going to sit around and wait for any asynchronous code within one of these functions
to come back or complete or return.
That's why the order down here is not what we might expect.
So the question becomes, how can we coordinate these four events so that each one waits until the previous
one has actually completed?
Well, let's first use the traditional callback approach and then after that we can try promises instead.